Minister, we have been waiting since 8:30 for you.
Oh, I apologize. I had 8:45 down. My apologies.
Oh, okay. All right. So there is a mix-up.
So Minister, thank you so much for your time.
We-
Oh, first I must apologize. Sincere apologies.
I thought it was 8:45.
All right, so we had 45 minutes for you, but now it
will be only around 30 minutes.
If you would like to start with some opening remarks, and if you could keep them
really, really brief, because we don't have enough time left for questions.
Thank you.
Yeah. Oh well, I'll just take everything as read.
This is a different fund than the period of time over the
last
government
and PGF.
This particular fund
is operated under different fiscal strictures.
A third of it, roughly speaking, has been grant financed.
The majority of it
has been bound by demanding
guardrails related to either debt financing
instruments or co-investment.
I don't mind saying, that has led to
more protracted processes, but that is the
outcome when you are waiting for your
co-investment partners
to mobilize the capital before the crown capital is invested.
At a
highlight
higher level, about $200 million has gone
into stop bank work.
That's co-investment with regional
councils.
About 120 million into energy.
About 60 million carrying on from
former Minister Megan Woods,
super hot critical geothermal energy.
About 50 million was put aside to de-risk and
address the acceleration of geothermal
infrastructure related matters, whether it's covering of
the early stages of geothermal projects.
About 150 odd million for additional water storage,
including the
formerly known Ruataniwha, much vexed Tukituki.
80 million for critical minerals.
Belatedly, an attempt to do something for
aviation connectivity, about 30 million.
I've got to say, I'd welcome any questions about that because I think it's
a
really tricky area for the Crown to be involved in.
Projects that you might put a moko on, call them Maori
development projects, about 40 million.
They come with their own complications, which I'm sure you're all aware of.
$200 million, the gas security fund, which has struck a few
problems, which I'll gladly elaborate upon,
relating to a court case late last year.
I only raise that because it's under the administration of the Karnoor
group.
And yeah, a variety of other projects.
And look,
there are other projects that are subject to Karnoor's
administration. But if you wanted an indication of some of the big amounts of dough
are,
Madam Chair,
perhaps I would leave that as an introductory set of remarks.
Thank you, Minister. So members, our minister is here in his
capacity as the Minister for Regional Development until 9:15, and after that, as
Minister for Resources. So I just want to make sure that the questions are split
accordingly. So we have questions.
We start with the Honorable Damien O'Connor.
Look, thank you, Minister, and
while appreciating the value of these funds over time,
keeping
tabs on them, it hasn't been easy. And
some people say it's Jonesy's slush fund, and I think you're proud of
much of the growth. But I guess from a taxpayer's perspective,
keeping tabs on it is important. One of the
performance measures have been removed, percentage of contracted projects
monitored at key contract
stages. It's been taken out, and the reason is, and I'm wondering whether
you've written this yourself because it's so eloquent.
If I can just say,
the vote notes the rationale for removing this measure is that, quote, "The
performance indicator and budget standard was removed for '26, '27,
and out years as a measure is already in place to establish a basic
auditable portfolio level contract monitoring
baseline by tracking evidence, monitoring, and movement
through contract stages." Could you explain what that means?
Yeah. I'll do one even better.
We've got about 145 million remaining in the fund.
So I'll go down to figures, so
you know exactly
how much dough is left, and I'll come back to putting in plain English what we
think we're doing.
We've committed about a billion dollars.
We've contracted about 450 million.
Sadly, we've only paid out about 100 million.
So I'm not happy about that.
But I go back to the fact the moment that you're spending most of the money via
co-investment or debt instruments as opposed to
subsidies or grants,
the simplest thing for the Crown to do in this area of expenditure is
subsidy or grant. The money just goes out the door.
But the government that I belong to decided that they would move
away from that historic approach
And go with a co-investment model, the belief that it represented more
discipline.
That slows the process down.
And then the trade-off is, in slowing it down, are you
reducing your impact on the economy
whilst trying to save dough?
i.e., save yourself from the prospect of throwing dough at the wrong
thing.
In relation to how much dough has been sought,
about 1.9 billion was applied for from a
$1.2 billion fund.
The key point that we're endeavoring to do
is, and I want to be straight up with you, Mr.
O'Connor,
had this fund had a different split
and more was grant or subsidy funding,
more dough would've gone out the door.
And that perhaps represents the key difference between the PGF
and the current fund.
So,
when we use the language you've just described,
it's an attempt to say that
monitor it,
but the monitoring really doesn't mean much in
terms of the impact on the ground until the money has been raised
by my co-investment partners.
Let's use an example.
Cabinet signed off on 30-odd million dollars on the nuclear fusion
project. That money will never see the light of day
in the event that, the lad, Ratu, I think his name is-
Vincent
... Mataira,
until he raises the international capital
from America or wherever, then the crown capital will flow.
So, at one level, we've made the announcement, but the impact on
jobs, the impact on the economy, will only be measurable
when he raises his money.
Supplementary? Yeah.
Yeah, supplementary. I'd be interested to pursue that one
as a question, but I don't want to follow individual projects.
If I can come back to regional development per se, if you were to take out the
record commodity prices for dairy and the record commodity prices for
beef,
how well is regional development going?
Well, the focus on this fund is infrastructure.
I think that the South Island regional economies are
outstripping
other regional economies. I think the East Coast is a basket case.
I think it's a basket case because of problems that
our local government institution has up there trying to
implement forestry regulations, amongst other things.
I won't to talk about my own area, but I do think that we have certain pockets
around New Zealand where we've got
elements of dysfunctionalism which are blighting the growth.
I think Taranaki's got a big problem with the closure and the rapid
decline of oil and gas. But in the South Island,
I think we've almost got, economically speaking, two different countries.
Could I-- Thank you. And if you look at the closures
of manufacturing plants, particularly around forestry,
lack of profitability in the wine industry,
it is, as you say, perhaps two economies and, as I say, take
away the opportunistic pricing for dairy and
beef. The question comes back to, do you think, in spite of your
efforts,
that the rest of the government's policy settings are assisting regional
development, or indeed, are they hampering it,
given you have made reference to electricity and the
structure of that market?
Yeah.
Well, fellow MPs,
the reason why we've thrown quite a bit of dough at energy, and
I genuinely believe it is infrastructure,
is that I have been told when I go around the country in regions,
a key impediment to growing economic enterprises is the cost of
electricity.
Mm.
I'm told this by
a variety of voices across the spectrum of the economy and the spectrum
of political forces.
So, I went back to our colleagues and said, "We've got to do something to
accelerate the delivery of energy." I have zero confidence in the
gentailers. You must
be aware of that. I was unsuccessful in securing the energy
portfolio because the party I belong to only got 6% vote.
I'm of the view that our economy is on a downward
spiral unless we can deliver a set of outcomes
that boosts the affordability of electricity in New Zealand.
So-
Yep
... thank you very much. I appreciate the percentage vote that you
have, but you've been able to leverage quite a lot of things through
government, through your position in Cabinet.
Why have you not been able to make any progress around electricity?
Well, I think, if you look at the pretty big amount of dough
that we've thrown at electricity-orientated projects, they do
take a long time, and we are waiting for my
colleague, Simeon, to bring back a recommendation as to what do we
do to strengthen the firming market in New Zealand.
And we're waiting for Simeon, my colleague, to bring us back a recommendation.
And I know that it's not really my wheelhouse, and I know he's been-- I
don't know if it was this committee or some committee, and you guys had a good go
at it, so I don't want to follow the Chair's admonition not to stray too
far. So I'll leave that corridor over there.
But I would
plead with you, Madam Chair, we've spent a lot of money out of this fund on energy,
but I'd ask that you accept that it takes several years before these
projects come to fruition. But I say it again
Our economy is going to hollow out due to climate
alarmism and the escalating cost of energy.
All right. One-
Thank you. One more. I guess, in terms of regional development, one of the things
that's been put forward, I think in Southland and other places, is the
development of data centers. So given the current
existing and uninterrupted electricity
market, do you think that the development of that
data center, and more of them, will assist other
users of electricity across the country?
Well,
I've been told that data centers in Auckland have left the
field of play because they couldn't get through the RMA.
The one down in
Southland,
I've been briefed by it. I've met the promoter on numerous occasions,
and providing that they can do a deal on
energy that doesn't escalate the cost of energy to every other New Zealander,
that's not a bad idea. But once again, I say
that
no one in New Zealand is responsible for energy security.
We're dreaming if we believe we can outsource to the gentailers the
sovereign role of energy security in New Zealand.
Mm-hmm.
We're dreaming if we believe we can outsource energy resilience to
the gentailers. They do not exist for that purpose.
They exist for the purpose of net profit after tax.
It's only the Crown that exists for energy national security,
and sadly, successive governments have outsourced
that sovereign role to the private market, and I mean to change that in the event
that we're privileged to govern again.
All right. New question or primary, Scott Willis?
Supplementary.
Supplementary to-- Yeah, Scott Willis.
So in relation to the data center, and given that we do not
have that secure firming, and we do not have the answer
from government,
do you still support the
Southland data center proceeding, knowing that that will
cause greater hardship, knowing that that is going to have an impact on
electricity prices?
Well, Madam Chair, I don't want to rain on the parade of any particular project.
Yeah.
Okay? They're entitled to go through the RMA process.
They're entitled in a market economy to have a go at setting up a
business.
My
line of sight is on what can I do as a politician with a small fund,
which Cabinet has to sign off on. I'm just a steward of it.
And this fund can contribute to a broad improvement of
energy affordability. So I'm not going to be drawn
by the honorable member into talking just about-
Yeah, okay
... one particular initiative.
Yeah. So-
I'd rather talk about this fund has endeavored to increase
the supply of energy by contributing towards geothermal energy
and other projects.
Yeah. So, Scott Willis, you want to bring your question to budget?
Yes.
The appropriation.
So a question on-
If you want to talk about energy. Yes.
What implications does the reduction in funding for the Regional Just
Transition have for the regions, where we've already heard
that they're suffering economic hardship, we're
having
industrial-
Sure
... crisis, we're having climate impacts happening.
What impact is that-
Yeah, okay
... reduction?
I don't believe in just transition.
I think it is climate alarmism and
puffery. So I'm totally disinterested in any project called Just Transition.
Yes, supplementary.
Yeah. So
taken that you believe that climate impacts are not
happening,
and yet there are extreme weather events, what advice did the minister receive from
officials regarding the potential consequences of
reducing funding for regional just transition
activities?
I think you're being unreasonable.
You must have read the briefing. The first $200
million that went from this fund
went to Stopbank flood resilience work.
You're talking to the politician who found the money that saved
Taradale. You're talking to the politician that found the
money, prior to being made unemployed in
2020, for the Stopbank work that saved
the town of Taradale. And had the money been properly deployed in
other parts of Hawke's Bay, in my view,
the devastating effects of those adverse weather events.
See, the difference between Mr. Willis and me is I don't deploy all
this catastrophic, alarmist language about climate change.
I'm the sort of politician that finds the money, gets on, and builds things,
and that's the best thing that Kiwi politicians can do, rather than
add to a chorus of shrill language that has zero impact on the
quality of lives of Kiwis. Our job in infrastructure is to spend the money
and boost the resilience of communities by doing practical things.
All right. A new primary from Dr. David Wilson.
Minister
spent $150 million on water storage.
To what benefit do you think?
Well,
if we
all accept that we're vacillating or oscillating between
El Niño and La Niña, and we're now going into incredibly
dry bout of weather, and vast
parts of the Hawke's Bay and parts of the Tairāwhiti are going to be
parched.
What is the state to do?
What does society expect of the state?
Can the market single-handedly
Deliver water resilience
to vast areas of the productive sector of
the eastern seaboard of New Zealand.
I say yes.
I think it's a tragedy that Bill English's government failed the Hawke's
Bay.
The Supreme Court, on the strength of one vote,
killed
the Ruataniwha project.
Bill English could easily have changed the law, the Reserves Act,
and breathed life into the Ruataniwha project, and the Hawke's Bay would
now have had 100 million cubic liters of water.
But that government chose not to do that.
So years later, we're having the same debate,
we're hearing the same tired, hackneyed phrases from the left of
politics that the world is frying and we've got to shrink our
economy. No. There's nothing we can do.
We can only invest in resilience and building water storage,
so the 150 million, which is a drop in the bucket in my view,
is an attempt. And I'll say one thing for Nick Smith, he brought
forward a private member's bill. It was not supported by Labor,
it was not supported by the Greens. Well, the Greens hate water storage.
It was supported
by New Zealand First in 2018. It was a private member's
bill. In the absence of that bill, there would be no Waimair water storage.
Yes, I know the project was far more expensive than it should've been, but at least
they've got water storage.
Question from Krisfina Tankiwaimano.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah.
Minister, you've mentioned East Coast as a basket case,
and
after the budget announcement, some people were disappointed that State Highway 35
was not mentioned. Will a portion of the RAF be
allocated to supporting resilience on State Highway
35?
Well, my personal view, it's not the government's view, is State Highway
35 should not
continue to be managed
in the way that it is.
I think it should be regarded as a bespoke highway,
because it's never ever, in my view, going to pass a certain
threshold that we expect for various highways.
I also think that what we should be doing is building a
wharf
or a jetty or some facility to help the businesses in
that area exploit the option of coastal
shipping. I accept that it's a controversial option.
David Parker almost got there.
And this fund, sadly, is not dedicated to
roading options. I know that that road certainly needs a lot of
care and love, but I just think that over time,
and I hope that a future government does treat that particular
rohe
as requiring a special
bespoke approach.
I think that the way in which the forestry rules are being applied up
there
is excessive.
I think also that there's great scope for
reintroducing and reigniting more agriculture in
certain areas.
I'm very encouraged that Poverty Bay can grow again with more water
storage, but I sort of feel it needs, from
whoever the government might be, a very focused approach to
rescue the fortunes of the Tairāwhiti.
And it's going to need more than a flash road.
Supplementary, yeah.
On that note, you have mentioned forestry.
Mm-hmm.
Are there any specific wood processing
projects from the growth fund that will help support
particularly forests north of Tokomaru Bay?
Well, we're talking about that rohe from around Cape
Runaway to, uh, Tokoroa, Tokomaru Bay.
What in the middle I would've thought, Madam Chair, is needed in New Zealand,
because we have to govern the country for the entirety of the multi.
Mm-hmm.
What we need there,
genuinely I believe this, Krisfina,
is the reestablishment of something akin to Portawanui.
And I think it's a genuine public good expenditure.
I mean, Route 35 is a public good expenditure.
Build a port. It will be relatively inexpensive,
so if we have produce from that part of New Zealand, it can go out by water.
And
the difficulty that I see
is that unless the Crown remains involved in some of
these areas, I just don't think there's a market solution.
I accept my view is not fully shared by all of my
coalition partners,
but
doesn't mean you're not allowed to have a view.
But that's not the view at the moment of our cabinet.
And that's fine. My job is to implement the cabinet dictates, and at
this stage, the fund is not available for the road.
Things might change in the future.
And I mean, I have to acknowledge, in Tauranga, they want roads as well.
The Bay of Plenty, they're desperate for roads.
Up home, we're desperate for roads.
I mean, we've got an infrastructure deficit in New Zealand.
I don't think we're going to be able to build a hell of a lot more four-lane
highways, if you don't mind me saying so, Madam Chair, until we get a better
handle on why roads are so expensive.
Mm-hmm.
Now, the Greens might say, "Well, thank God you've come to your senses, Shane.
We don't need more roads." Well, I'm not quite that radical.
All right. Scott, you have a question. Yeah.
Coming back to the Ruataniwha dam.
Yep.
That,
is it the government's
perspective that it's actually valuable to put money into zombie projects that
have already been defeated in the courts, that have already shown that
they don't have a lot of community support, and that in fact, instead
of Increasing resilience may in fact
provide or set people up for greater challenges in
the future, given we've had waterborne outbreaks in
that area, given that the increased
intensification of dairy is known to create problems
in that area.
Well, I'll just park up our election debates for another 10
weeks.
Yeah.
But
I would say,
I'll go back to Damien O'Connor's question,
what really are you on about when you use the term regional
development? It is dynamic, and
I accept what you're saying that because Ruataniwha
failed, but I don't think it's fair to say that you should still
judge a project as being zombied because the Supreme
Court voted against it in 2000, whenever Bill English was
around. What year was that? 2015 or '16.
Circumstances have evolved, so each government has to make a call
based on the vicissitudes of the time that it's governing in.
And I do believe the Tukituki project, which I think is the
old Ruataniwha project, is still a valid
economic proposition.
Question from Kushla Tangaidi.
E Te Minita, you probably more than anyone in this room understand
the complexities of dealing with Mana Whenua and iwi in scenarios like
this, and I have had concerns from whanau around Ruataniwha about
this project. How will your government manage those
relationships?
Yeah. That's a valid point.
So yesterday, I had a meeting with
Tamatea, the Taiwhenua.
And I do feel
that
at an operational skirmish level,
there are a lot of
sore points in terms of water
projects with the Tangata Whenua,
but my plea to them is
lift it up to the strategic level.
Surely, the strategic war that the Hawke's
Bay is involved in,
if you do not have water
when you are facing
the statistical probability
that the temperatures in your area are going to lead to
more droughts,
lead to more parched landscapes,
surely to maintain the productivity of your pastoral-based,
land-based economy requires you to have
access to water. If the groundwater is finite,
but Mother Nature does do these drops of water from time to
time, then capture it.
So that's the call, and if the community is divided,
then what does the Crown do? Does it intervene?
Because over time, the cost will fall on the taxpayers.
So I say as a part of the government I belong to,
it's a defensible decision for the Crown to make to
intervene and lead the outcome of water storage.
And
for the people who think that that's heretical
and we have no mandate, meet me at the ballot box.
All right. We have Ramrey from Dr. David Woodside.
Minister, you started off by mentioning the difference between grants, debt, and
co-funding, difficulties in those
arrangements.
What do you think we've learnt from the Regional Infrastructure Fund as a
whole
in that regard?
Well,
look, let's all be honest with each other.
The last government,
if I can use, and in a very professional way, if I can use as
an example the former Minister of Energy.
She championed an intervention,
where money was redirected from the
ETS auctions,
and that money
was deployed
to meet the costs of the zero transition.
And amongst other areas where the money
was directed was the steel mill, I think some of the dairy
investments in the South Island.
And then a new government came in that I'm a part of,
and the sense was that was not an appropriate role for the Crown
to intervene with Crown money.
Then we set up a fund
where our party, as a small part of the current government,
did believe that Crown intervention from time to time is appropriate.
And, I won't walk away from the fact that there have been times of
tension
because you have to pass a high threshold
as to whether or not you can justify the intervention.
And that is why the intervention is based around
predominantly co-investment.
But to do co-investment, the other side need to go and mobilize the
capital, and to do that, the staff have to take a
damn
very
protracted and calculated approach to make sure that the deal is
real.
I'm not saying that you be reckless with subsidy and grant money, but
at the end of the day, there's a certain threshold, the door goes out the door.
But you are waiting when other people are mobilizing capital, it may be
international capital that they're raising.
So I think the lesson that we've learned is that if you have the
co-investment approach- You are inevitably going to take a lot
longer, because you're not in control of the process purely yourself.
Other people are in control of the process on their side of the ledger.
Mm-hmm.
That's probably one of the learnings.
Question, Kushla Daghani Manuel.
Thank you. Tena koe, Minister. Maori economic development
is a priority area of this fund.
$40 million was mentioned. Do you think that's adequate, and how
are the outcomes being measured?
Well,
I think the figure is probably a bit higher
than
what I've articulated.
But if I can just refer to some of the
projects.
What we've tried to do
is focus in some areas
in rural New Zealand on energy.
So,
some of the projects, for example,
in the Bay of Plenty,
they're in pretty isolated areas.
And often, it's been the lines companies, the power lines have
said, "Look, can you work with us in the local Maori communities and do solar
projects?"
So that
when the bad weather strikes,
and perhaps this is what Mr. Willis was talking about.
Maybe that's a small example of just transition.
Embed a solar project, I guess, with batteries.
Mm.
So, if you have crappy weather,
the system fails, there's a local source of energy.
And because in some of these rural areas, the only damn thing that's in existence
is a marae. There are no community halls.
There is no rugby club.
So, that's an example.
And of course, there have been other projects
where we've defined our infrastructure
as being marae infrastructure, because
in some of these areas, that's all there is.
That's excited some of the scribblers on Instagram who feel that that's
racist expenditure. But once again, meet me
at the ballot box. There's got to be some balance in the allocation
of these funds and how we define infrastructure.
It looks like, Minister, those are the questions that members
had for today. I think there might be some follow-up questions later on.
So now we move to the next portfolio of yours,
the resources.
We allow a couple of minutes if there's going to be any change of any official.
Right.
Thank you.
Okay.
I
forget we had today.
Six months.
We
are starting with resources-
Yeah
... and then we will go on. Thank you.
Okay. Well, given I've got off to an awkward start about the confusion over the
timing,
yeah, just
presume that you've had a look at the
material. Now, got the officials with me if the questions get too
finicky.
Amongst other things,
as I said, and I'll repeat it again,
the role covers off
not only the oil and gas sector,
my
attempt to lead a reinvigoration
of the mineral sector.
A small role in
terms of fuel security,
and
a
role
in the sense that
my views are sought from time to time
in the fast track process if, for example,
a project emerges
in the fast track where MBIE
may be
contacted to give a view about a minerals project.
But look, other than that, I'll just take questions.
Thank you, Minister. We'll start with Honorable Megan Woods.
Thank you, Minister. Just the first line of
questioning, just would like an update
on the critical minerals
framework with the US-
Yeah
... and what the stage is with that, what the timeline's looking
like there.
Right.
Well, last year--
Madam Chair, if you can give me three to five minutes, because I just want to-
Yes, that's fine
... skip us through. Now, and I'm certainly not going to shy away from answering
this question.
No, that's fine. Be useful.
So
last year, and I'll need some help from the officials.
Last year, New Zealand committed to a supply
framework
Which has since been called FORGE.
Now, what the hell was that formerly called?
Mineral Security Partnership.
Right, Mineral Security Partnership,
formerly a collectivity chaired
by Korea,
and we committed to it,
Minister,
Honorable Member Woods.
The chairmanship, I think, is shifting
to America.
That is well underway.
Late last year,
MB and Foreign Affairs begun to engage with
America.
There have been moderate levels of contact between
Japan and Korea.
On the latter,
I want the level of intensity to grow as soon as the
Korean ambassador is appointed to New Zealand.
I'm not sure when that's going to happen.
Obviously, I feel the intensity of contact will
grow once the American ambassador arrives here.
That's going to happen very soon.
I have not taken a Cabinet paper forward to
sign off any bilateral deal with
America.
It is my intention to do so,
but Foreign Affairs and MB haven't given me such a
paper. I don't mind telling,
Madam Chair,
my fellow parliamentarians, the real sticky bit
is should New Zealand commit
to a floor price?
By that, Madam Chair,
if we are
to try
and boost our capacity
to have critical minerals as an industry in New Zealand,
whilst knowing that it is largely dominated by a
longstanding set of very powerful interests in the mineral
sector coming out of China, who have the ability
to
change, through powerful influences, the clearing price.
And
projects and businesses, Madam Chair,
do have to shutter
or actually close down because they can't match
the clearing price when the price drops.
One option that the Americans have promoted in Australia with
their deal is a guaranteed floor price.
Now, I don't have the support of Cabinet for a guaranteed floor
price that someone in New Zealand would have to underwrite.
So that remains--
That's why I asked you for three to five minutes.
That remains an outstanding issue because I'm advised,
and I'm pretty sure Susan behind me will tell me that I'm saying the right thing,
that potentially offends or violates various
trade agreements that we've committed to.
So,
I don't have anything more to add until that issue is resolved.
I don't see myself being in a position
to
take
any prospective deal
to my colleagues. That's probably the most lucid thing I can
say to you as my colleagues, parliamentary speaking.
Thank you very much for that. Just to clarify, so the
not having the Cabinet support for a floor price that's underwritten,
that would be a government underwrite, would it be?
Well,
the way I see it as the promoter, well, obviously Winston Peters is involved as
well, but I've taken on the role of doing the heavy lifting.
If I look at the Australian option,
the Australian option is that they do have something
akin to a floor price. Well, who's going to pay for that?
Sure. And it's a government underwrite.
Well, at this stage, it is not government policy in New
Zealand-
Yeah
... to have a government underwrite.
Yeah.
I have to stress that is not policy of the New Zealand Government.
It may be the policy of the Australian government, but it's not the policy of the
New Zealand government.
So have you asked officials for advice on a
government underwrite in the New Zealand context, understanding it's not current
policy?
Yeah. So this progress, sorry, this
process has been progressing for, what the hell is this month?
For about four or five months, and there's been a lot of
toing and froing. You might imagine that the people responsible for
consistency with trade obligations,
they've been studying these things and toing and froing for months on end.
Thank you.
So just in terms of the timeline, I think it was in
early February that a draft framework went to Cabinet
around it. Then on the 18th of February,
there was the $18 million ring fence
from the Regional Infrastructure Fund around supporting
critical mineral projects. Was this
linked to the work that was going on in
terms of the critical minerals framework, and was
that ring-fencing of funding discussed with the
US?
So, what was the American guy's name?
Michael...
Koon.
Susan?
Dosomba.
Hmm?
Michael Dosomba.
Yeah, Dosomba.
So, the undersecretary, we can give you the proper name.
He came down here about six weeks ago.
We had a meeting here in Parliament with a bunch of
stakeholders. He brought a high-level delegation from
America.
Within that interaction between myself,
a bunch of mineral companies,
reps from the Japanese Embassy, the Korean Embassy,
the Aussie High Commission
I gave a briefing about the $80 million
RIF fund.
Mm-hmm.
But in terms of a dedicated negotiation over that
fund with the Americans, no, that was a Cabinet decision, quite
separate from
negotiations
pertaining to a potential deal
with the Americans. But when Michael
out of Washington came here, I gave a briefing-
Sure
... in front of all and sundry to him and his delegation.
So in those discussions with the US late last year
and early this year, prior to the February Cabinet paper,
was the need for New Zealand to have some
government backing of critical minerals discussed?
I don't know. I'd need to check. I regarded the RIF fund.
I regarded the RIF fund. So how it arose.
Yeah, I don't think it's fair to say that it was driven by the Americans.
It was largely driven by myself.
I found myself in a situation
where I took a proposal
to my colleagues,
if we wanted, in New Zealand,
largely in the West Coast, but not exclusively.
If we wanted in New Zealand, a critical minerals
industry
that was struggling to monetize its
operations with outside capital,
then I believed,
as we did with the goldmine in Reefton, our government,
I believed that we should de-risk it.
Now, it took a while to develop that, I must confess, because it meant Crown
intervention, and there were elements amongst my colleagues
who doubted that was an appropriate role, and fair enough.
But we did have a precedent in Jacinda's government by putting $20 million
into a goldmine.
So, that took a while to develop,
and I'd been talking about it for quite a while as the
Minerals Minister. So, I don't think it's fair to say it was
driven by whatever discussions had been happening
in Washington.
So have you-
It was la- it was largely driven by myself.
Have any projects been funded out of that ring-fenced $80 million yet?
No. What we've done, we haven't funded any projects.
We opened up an application process,
and we have received applications,
and we are now at a point of finalizing with
successful applicants,
um, terms and conditions, but we're not at the stage at a
point
where we can publicly declare them until such time we've
agreed terms and conditions.
But, um,
uh, Madam Chair, it remains my view it's a
legitimate and defensible
way of committing Crown resources to accelerate these
types of, um, of enterprises.
A supplementary from Dr. David Wilson.
Uh, thank you, Minister. Um, what are the national and/or regional
benefits from exploration to critical minerals?
Well,
it depends how far, um, you spread them.
There is an entity called Aspiring.
They're um...
I don't know if you'd define them as critical minerals, but
they've been working with our officials.
Um, they're fairly well known.
Then there are the entities down there in the
Pipituna. Tungsten, monazite,
garnet.
So
they will create jobs, but the level of processing you can do in
New Zealand
is actually limited because of the negative externalities associated with
intense processing in New Zealand.
I just don't feel that Kiwis
will put up with the environmental footprint
of the full range of processing that's required.
Some semi-processing perhaps.
I just
have my doubts that Kiwis would, um, be able to tolerate
the full range of negative externalities that the Chinese, for example, are
willing to wear.
Right. A new question, Steve Edward.
Thank you. Uh, Madam Chair,
in terms of your ambition to
grow the value of mineral exports-
Mm-hmm
... and to the point you've just made about the negative externalities.
Yeah.
Forest and Bird have just published a map of the, uh,
conservation estate that's,
um, impacted by the,
the new proposed opening of 60% of it to
potential exploitation and sale.
Uh.
That's largely driven by that ambition-
I can't see that
... for minerals.
I, I can't see what issue-
Sorry.
Or, or just, yes.
It's just a map of the areas, um, that the government's proposing to open up-
That's right
... in conservation estate. And the, the major driver of
that is your desire for an increase in critical
minerals
extraction.
Mm.
Is it your understanding that the large cache of
those potential minerals exist in conservation estate?
Is that why there is a push by the government to do this opening up
of those particular areas?
Okay.
I, I, look, I'm aware of a, a newspaper article.
Donald dodged the question.
Um, and Tama said he's gonna go back and possibly reverse the decision, but
now I know the value of the decision, I might oppose Tama doing that.
I had no idea that was the effect. I don't think it's fair, Madam
Chair, to say you can't blame
my advocacy for the minerals sector.
I just happen to believe that the DOC estate is too big
I happen to believe since 1987 that Kiwis are on
my side, that we need to create more
opportunities for economic development within 38%
of New Zealand's landscape.
And I do accept that it's heresy for some
members of Parliament,
but I just look at the state of our economy, and I think it's time that we
exploit part of that 38%.
I might be right, I might be wrong. We'll know at the ballot box.
Right. We go to, Honorable Megan Woods.
Thank you. Just going back to the critical-
Yes
... minerals framework.
So,
from what I've gleaned from public sources, negotiations restarted
in April
with the US.
Right. Where are we up to?
Re-engagement. Yep.
Yeah. Re-engagement negotiations restarted in April.
Is the July deadline for the US still running?
Where are we up to there?
I mean, negotiations are still underway is the short version.
I don't think there is a-
That's right
... would that be right, Kate?
That's right. There's no particular deadline we've been set.
So have the US softened on the July
deadline in terms of what-
They seem to be a bit distracted
... in terms of the tariff penalties?
Well, I'll give you a straight-up answer.
We can get an answer sooner rather than later.
I'd like to tidy it up before the election, but we can only run as
fast as they can operate.
Sure.
Well, yeah, we can put that in writing. That's fine.
So after, the re-engagement or negotiations
restarting in April, accepting that the
RIF had been something you'd been, the ring-fence and the RIF had been something
you'd been thinking about-
Mm
... prior to the February talks.
Yeah.
And since this April re-engagement or any other engagement,
have any possible projects within the $80 million ring-fence been discussed?
You know, I think we had a really good meeting, eh?
What was the date when Michael came to have a meeting in
Parliament?
Was it, April or May?
It was mid-April. Yeah.
Okay, so mid-April, the American delegation came down.
I mean, this guy's very senior. We can give you the details.
So we had, I don't know, half a dozen firms who are already
mining. They're out there raising capital.
He gave an indication of how you gain access to the
Congress-mandated capital.
We told them to deal with the American Embassy.
He's since emailed back with various people who may be interested in New Zealand.
I don't think much has come of it.
So it's all been fairly transparent.
These
entities that are busy in New Zealand, some of them have listed on
the Kiwi share market.
Are they likely to gain access
to any of that American capital?
I hope they do, but it's going to be hard yakka, because the types of projects
they're looking at genuinely are of a larger scale.
Sure. A supplementary to that. So was
co-funding from the $80 million
ring-fenced amount discussed-
Yeah, so-
... for those projects?
Yeah. So the deal is that
in the event
that those
current mineral operators can
source
private capital, which they're meant to be doing anyway,
and crowd in
money from other sources,
then the RIF fund is there
to help de-risk capital mobilization,
and it's premised on the notion
that the New Zealand Government
is an eager participant
to see the footprint grow,
but not to totally guarantee,
as we have guaranteed,
for example, bank loans in our recent budget
initiative.
It's to assist in crowding capital into
mining initiatives.
Thank you. So just to confirm, there is a
live set of possibilities that the-
Yes, every day I'm encouraging that.
Yeah.
Every day.
Yeah. That from that $80 million allocation, there could
be projects that include conditions
linked to the US framework and/or the US
public finance that is on offer with that.
It just depends, Megan, on what deals they can pull together,
and as I said, we haven't announced anything, because we haven't
seen any evidence to date
that there's any live deals out there.
So will there be, I mean, as part of that discussion,
offtake commitments, preferred access,
links to supply chains in the US? Have those discussions
been had?
Yeah. Well, therein lies the problem. We haven't got a deal to ink.
I haven't got a paper to take-
Yeah
... to Cabinet, because the Americans haven't responded to
our officials with any level of exactitude
that I'm in possession of information that I can take to our cabinet.
So will you release details of that
before any deal would be signed?
Well, you've asked two things there.
I'd take some advice from the foreign affairs as to what can and can't
be released before I go to,
Cabinet.
And in relation to commercial deals, well, I'd have to take advice
from the architects of those deals as to what's appropriate for
release. I wouldn't want to either imperil the Crown
or indeed compromise
my fellow New Zealanders
in terms of what they're trying to put together.
All right. New primary, Steven.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Minister, in terms of the specific critical minerals that-
Yeah
... are of interest to international markets-
Aye
...
is it
your understanding that the United States has such a high interest in
vanadium and antimony because they
are essential in the manufacture of
military hardware?
Well,
I don't want to dodge the question,
but I'm advised that antimony,
which is
something that raw gold
is very interested in.
Mm.
And vanadium,
sadly, is a project that's marooned
because of these muppets
up in Taranaki.
Hopefully the applicants have another go at it.
But I don't think that you can
stigmatize those two
genuine mineral properties
just because
the final use may or may not end up being a
part of the military complex.
And I think this is what distinguishes the Green Party
from my party in terms of politics.
Do you think that New Zealanders would be comfortable with-
... conservation estate being given over to mining to produce
minerals that could end up as part of the American war machine?
Well, that's a very
emotive
and
classic sort of Vietnam War, outmoded
expression of language.
That's the practical reality of what we're looking at, though, isn't it?
All right.
No, no, no. But I think Kiwis want jobs.
I think Kiwis want development. I think Kiwis want to know
whoever the business is, Mr. Abel,
operating out of our country, they're obeying the law.
Now, if they sell to other businesses operating in the
US, EU, wherever, providing no one,
like the business, the rocket business out of Mahia Peninsula, as long as they
haven't broken the law, I don't really care.
You don't-
All right, all right. Questions to the Chair. Supplementary, Dr.
Vanessa Baden.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Minister Jones.
I understand antimony's also used in hardening plates
and lead acid batteries,
and also in
semiconductors, which are used in electronics.
Do you think that New Zealanders want to see more
energy storage through batteries?
And should we be
participating in processes
that lead to more battery storage and more
electronic uses?
Yeah. These rare hitherto unknown minerals in
New Zealand have a myriad of
values, whether it's monazite, tungsten,
garnet.
So I just shy away from
catastrophizing the limited military
implications.
Mm.
There's energy, there's medical purposes, there's industrial
purposes.
But, I don't deny,
doctor, that there may from time to time be military
purposes.
Mm.
But technology has multiple
outputs.
Mm.
And what previously wasn't military, today might be military.
Supplementary.
Supplementary, Stephen.
Yeah. So,
80% of the vanadium supply is controlled by China and Russia, which is
why the US is so anxious to get its own supply.
Would you, in the context of the previous question,
be happy to say that we are only prepared to supply the likes of these
minerals for specific clean energy uses, not for
military uses,
if there's such a narrow part of what they're going to be used for?
Well, no, I'm not in a position to dictate
who and how
investors
end up operating their businesses.
They must obey the law.
Now, if there are various export bans,
if there are various guardrails, then they have to
obey them. But look,
I just want to sort of bring a dose of reality here.
If we do not want the footprint in New Zealand of
extracting these critical minerals,
but we still need them, and we're going to draw them from
countries that have a worse environmental
record-
Mm
... how is that better for the globe?
So why is it and what is it that gives us the
sense of moral green superiority
that we'll keep our virginity here, but we'll quietly buy things from
other areas where they have a more s****y reputation than we do?
I don't do my politics like that.
That's what separates you and I.
Mm.
All right. Any more questions?
I've got a follow-up. Yeah, yeah.
I wonder in regard to
acquiring resources-
Yep
... what opportunities or advice you have sought on
resource recovery opportunities for getting the likes of these minerals.
For example-
There's 800 times more gold in a
ton of electronic waste than there is in a ton
of Coromandel hard rock.
And that's a highly unexplored opportunity for
e-waste recovery where minerals have already been extracted,
and before they go into landfill, they could be
reacquired and utilized and be of great value
economically.
Okay. Well,
no, I haven't
looked into that.
But I guess I'd say to you all,
the market's not prohibiting that from happening,
so why is the market not delivering that outcome?
New question from Honorable Megan Woods.
Thank you. I am going to change tack, but members might want to come back to that.
I just want to talk about the $200 million gas
fund-
Yeah
... that was set up.
How many
proposals are actively being considered at the
moment?
Well, look,
last year,
the Supreme Court,
as you may know,
I'm not happy with the Supreme Court.
They made a decision,
Madam Chair,
I think it's called the Aotearoa
Youth Climate or something.
It was a decision that was
passed
in November or December,
which
requires the minister
to have quite an extensive
appraisal of climate change
implications when allocating or considering
petroleum permit applications.
And then,
broadly speaking, Madam Chair, it requires
a far more expansive consideration of tangata whenua interests
beyond the local Taranaki hapū.
Now, I don't like that decision,
and
sadly, I've run out of time for us to pass legislation to outlaw that decision.
I see that as judicial adventurism.
And
I'm having to wade through that decision
as to whether or not the implications of that decision
represents some kind of
obstacle to rapidly allocating the
pūtea from the $200 million.
We haven't signed any
applications off. We have a huge number of people who are
interested in accessing it. It does include
people keen on investing and storing gas.
The Gen Taylors, not surprisingly,
seem to be disinterested in meeting the capital costs of storing gas.
So I'm keen to
sign those off well before the election.
But I don't mind revealing here, Madam Chair, which hasn't been
stated publicly yet, I don't mind revealing
here
that
we've had to work out what are the implications of that Supreme
Court decision
on decisions we may take, and will be taking,
over this $200 million fund.
Are there any applications that are sitting there awaiting decision,
once you've waded through the court decision, that are from overseas
companies?
I'm not sure. I
think there's one. I
haven't actually had a full list because I've kept aloof from it
for fear of me knowing who these people are.
What we've got is we've got a wee committee of three experts, and
then we've got MBIE,
and then there's a couple of ministers, I think is how it works.
Then they're eventually going to come to us.
So I haven't had, to the best of my knowledge, I might be proven wrong,
but Catherine, I don't think I've seen a full list to date of the
applicants. I'm not entirely sure how many of them have an international
connection. Some of them might.
But where people have been to see me and they're keen to express
an interest to get access to the money, I send them straight to
Susan and the people all around me here.
Sure. Do officials want to comment on that?
Yeah, I think there's one applicant that's keen that
has connections
with the UK. But other than that, I don't know.
Thank you. You said there's a committee of three experts.
Who are-
Yeah, there's Andy Knight,
not Parisini, who's the other fella?
Jordan Bagani.
Jordan Bagani, and who's the other fella?
Tim Allen.
Right.
Okay.
In terms of
biogas and any projects
that are around
biogas, are they being considered within that fund?
Linked in biogas?
There are no biogas applications that we have at the moment.
Cool. Now, I asked you in a written question, Minister,
around whether or not you'd sought or received Crown Law or Treasury
advice around commercial liability or indemnity
risks
linked to the-
On what risk?
For commercial liability or indemnity risks that were linked to any
projects.
You said that your officials had engaged with Treasury and Crown
Law in developing advice around the fund.
Are you or your officials able to give us any update around what that
liability or indemnity risk for the Crown might look like?
Thank you. So we generally use external
legal advice for commercial risks to deal with commercial risks.
Each project we assess, we do a risk assessment on
the full range of risks, so not just commercial liability.
When we present those decisions to ministers, we cover
those.
Thank you.
How the system has worked, but I don't mind
saying that MB
have taken their time on this issue.
There's obviously a lot of judiciousness at play.
They've certainly been a lot more judicious than I would've been, because
partly it's a significant amount of money,
and they are working amongst other people.
Obviously, Andy Knight is fairly well known to members on this committee.
He is an expert.
And we know that it's contested space.
It's highly contested space.
But it's my view that there can be more gas
squeezed figuratively out of the geological sponge.
But it has worked out to be a tad slower than I
would've liked,
but I'm trusting in a machine that we have delegated the mahu
to.
It's not driven just by one politician.
But I do hope to take decisions forward to colleagues
well before
the election.
Got a sub one there.
Thank you. All right. Just- Yeah. I've just got one more sub. Yeah.
So, in terms of looking at alternatives for that,
and, Minister, you said that Kiwis want jobs.
Couldn't agree more.
Mm.
We've discussed deals with the US, we've discussed a
$200 million fund that we're dealing with overseas
companies and how they may get a handout from the government around that.
Have you asked for advice around how we might be able to develop
energy security ourselves here and create Kiwi jobs
around things like the creation of, for
example, biomass and torrefied pellets-
Yeah
... in the central North Island, and are you willing
to pivot that fund to start actually backing Kiwi companies and
Kiwi workers around that? And will we see decisions coming out of
that $200 million fund backing them rather than overseas
companies?
So,
I will gladly get the officials to write you a letter, because that was the
presentation of the last
scrutiny session.
The money that's come out of the RIFT fund dedicated to those very projects.
No, I'm talking about the $200 million fund.
Yeah. The RIFT fund-
Yeah
... has already spent a considerable amount of money on energy
projects of the nature that you just described.
Okay. But that $200 million fund-
This $200 million fund is for gas
And overseas companies that are currently talking to you about it.
Well, no overseas company has been given any money from this fund, and you've got
to stop catastrophizing-
No, but you're in talks with the minister
... way ahead of doing that.
But you're in talks with the minister.
Well, I've talked with everyone. I'm the prince of the provinces.
I've talked with all and sundry.
All right. Well, the prince of the global multinationals. Okay.
A question from Steve Abel.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just to get confirmation on that fund.
This is a quick sub on that, but I've got a bigger sub.
Biogas is eligible for that fund?
Biogas are eligible for... What's the answer?
The limitation is natural gas.
Yeah. Natural gas.
So that includes biogas?
Potentially. Like I say, we haven't had any applications, so we haven't done that
assessment.
Okay. Cool. So my primary question is, Minister, you
passed legislation. We put to the first...
Or we passed it, actually, legislation on transparency around
the gas reserves.
There is a tradition around the world of the oil and gas industry overstating
its proven reserves, for obvious reasons, because the value
of the industry is tied up in those.
Do you have
any advice on whether there has been an overstatement
of what the gas reserves are, an
overestimation or an overbooking of proven reserves?
Well,
I think what the advice shows is that the
decline
is more precipitous
than originally anticipated. But I'd be loathed to
say it was a deliberate, conspiratorial
attempt to overstate it.
The facts show
that the decline has been steeper
than what was originally anticipated.
I wonder how do you assure yourself that there hasn't
been
an intentional overstating, given that there is the likes of
Anadarko, Shell Oil, there's numerous companies around the world, have been
fined for overstating their proven
reserves. How do you assure yourself that that's not what's been
going on here in New Zealand, given the significant consequences for industry
of an expectation that there was more gas than there actually
is?
Yeah. Well, let's just agree to disagree.
I mean, all I can do is go off the facts that
MB put in front of me.
And, there's no shortage of people who are of
the view that there is more gas, geologically
speaking, in the broad seascape and landscape of
New Zealand. And I think a key difference between
me and people perhaps on our side of the government,
and
the philosophy
that you and Megan reflect, is that you have
an impoverished view
about the gas potential, and we have a more confident view
We just agree to disagree.
All right. A new question from Honorable Megan Woods.
Thank you. Minister, you talked earlier in the term around doing
work around raising royalties-
Yep
... on Crown minerals. Have you advanced that work stream?
Yes.
The officials have done quite a bit of work on
options. Well, what would options look like to
change the royalty regime,
and sharing the flow of those royalties with the
regions. However,
I've chosen not to advance that work until after the
election. I don't mind sharing with you, Madam Chair, it was my
sense that we're better off,
as a government, this was my advice to my key colleagues,
to lessen the uncertainty
associated with changing that regime.
Rather, I would take
the role of boosting
the desirability of crowding more investment into the
mineral sector, and then dealing after
the election with
how much
and to what extent that regime should change, and have the
pūtea redirected to the regions.
So, in getting advice
and thinking through the policy changes that would be needed there,
did you get feedback from either mining or oil and
gas companies that they would withdraw their investments if royalties
were raised?
I
don't
think anyone really said that they were going to b****r
off, but
whenever, Madam Chair, there's a hint that the Crown is
going to change tax rates, if I can use that term loosely,
you're always going to get
frowns and dark responses.
But the Crown is
entitled to change levy structures if they feel there's a
compelling need. But that won't be happening,
if indeed it ever does happen, until after the election.
So it's a-
Final supplementary from Dr. David Lewis. Final supplementary from Dr.
David Lewis.
Thank you, Chair. Yes, Minister. We've spent an awful lot of time on minerals.
We're getting into things like biogas and biomass and torrefied pellets,
largely unproven at an industrial level.
But are there other resources that you think New Zealand has that we could utilize
to our benefit for energy?
Look, the final thing I'd say is that,
and obviously we need to invite
officials, we need to invite opposition
politicians. I'm hosting a very large hydrogen event
in Christchurch. I think one of the lessons from the
Palmerston Street
debacle
is there is a case for boosting the capacity
of hydrogen
to add resilience to the fuel situation in New
Zealand.
And
one thing that's bedeviled me personally is the
inability to create a legislative
response to
simplify the creation and the
growth of the hydrogen sector.
I wanted to
nationalize the hydrogen resource.
Naturally, that ran into treaty claims, so that didn't go anywhere.
And if there's some way of simplifying the
ability of investors
to gather
permits to exclusively harness hydrogen,
simply, I think that's a new frontier.
There is white hydrogen.
I'm not a physicist. I don't have a background in chemistry,
but obviously I have a business background.
So, that was a simple example
where I think there is a grand case for that.
All right. We'll conclude this hearing there. Thank you so much, Minister.
Thank you, Minister.
And there might be some follow-up questions, written questions. Thank you.